---
title: Question of Survival of Hundreds of Teachers and Education of Thousands of Students
description:
    In democracy the principal function of the govt is to work as per the desire of the people. The
    elected Government cannot work on its own whimsical.
featured: true,
topic:
    name: Politics
    color: f20a03
publishedAt: Sat Sep 11 2021 14:00:00 GMT+0530
author:
    name: Ray Nirola
    avatar: images/raynirola.jpg
coverImage: images/question-of-survival-of-hundreds-of-teachers-and-education-of-thousands-of-students/banner.jpg
---

## Press Release

The teachers were sitting in Dharna from past more than a week now with a demand of an extension to
their job as adhoc teachers in the schools across the state, where they were working as teachers
after passing a walk-in interview conducted by education department a year back. Their demand is
very rational. At a time when the economy is badly hit and price rise is sky rocketing it is
extremely difficult for unemployed to meet the essential needs of their families. Moreover, owning
to the Govt’s decision to cancel their appointments without giving extension has caused irreparable
loss to the thousands of students across the state as their classes have been disrupted since June
this year unending. Schools in Sikkim are running with shortage of at least 850 teachers. Most of
these teachers teach in in the class 10 and 12, who will write board exam, the first term of which
is slated to be held in Nov-Dec this year. Many of these teachers who are out of job now teach vital
subjects like physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, English, geography, economics, history etc.
in the schools. In this backdrop the dharna being organised by the adhoc teachers with the demand of
extension is genuine and is not just for those few hundred teachers but for the thousands of
students of Sikkim whose fundamental right to education has been denied from past four months now.
With the Govt’s decision to start the interview from oct 3, the situation is bound to remain the
same for few more months.

## Teachers in dharna were never against the 8 years policy of the govt.

During the entire dharna and even before that not a single teacher was heard even criticising the 8
years policy, let alone opposing it. They have been clear right from the beginning that they just
want the extension of their jobs until the process of interview is completed by SSTRB.

## Ruling party trying to create violent clash to end the dharna without addressing their demand.

Now giving a false narrative the ruling party and its henchmen are going berserk on media with a
conspiracy of misleading the public and creating a division among the adhoc teachers. With the same
objective there have been announcements on media that the new policy has been rolled back. Although
the adhoc teachers in dharna had never demanded this, the intension behind this is to arouse a
section of adhoc teachers against the teachers in dharna. More than anything else, the Govt is
trying to create a hostile group of adhoc teachers to clash with the teachers who are in Dharna now
by propagating a false narrative. The similar tactic was used by the ruling party by sponsoring a
mob to disrupt a peaceful dharna against the fare hike by SPYF in October 2020. The measures of the
ruling Govt in last few days indicate that they are planning toward the same end. The ultimate
objective might be to create a clash between different factions of adhoc teacher in DAC soon just to
end the dharna without addressing their demands. Rather than engaging time, energy, power and
Government mechanism to create violence and clash to end their peaceful dharna without addressing
their demands we request the Government to engage in a dialogue with them and solve it amicably.
Their demand is extremely reasonable and the Govt must hear them.

## End the culture of ADHOC appointment and replace it with regular appointment policy based on open and transparent competition.

As the news of the Govt decision to roll back the 8 years policy is in news we demand the Govt to
end this culture of adhoc appointment and replace it with the culture of conducting transparent open
exam to fill up whatever vacancies that are there in the department.
