---
title: We Remember Leo Tolstoy On His Birth Anniversary
description:
    Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy, usually referred to in English as Leo Tolstoy, was a Russian
    writer who is regarded as one of the greatest authors of all time.
featured: true,
topic:
    name: General
    color: 00a656
publishedAt: Sat Sep 12 2021 01:00:00 GMT+0530
author:
    name: Ray Nirola
    avatar: images/raynirola.jpg
coverImage: images/we-remember-leo-tolstoy-on-his-birth-anniversary/banner.jpg
---

Born on 9th September 1828 at Yasnaya Polyana, Russia, Leo Tolstoy is regarded as one the greatest
novelists of all time. The two longest novels of Tolstoy, War and Peace and Anna Karenina, have been
critically acclaimed by many as one of the finest novels of all time. Apart from his literary
geniuses, his pacifism and nonviolent resistance have influenced people of the stature of Mahatma
Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr and continue to do so till date. His efforts to educate the
children of peasants and profound love for the downtrodden makes the study of his life and
achievements relevant in the present juncture of time.

Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy was born in an aristocratic family and was the fourth among the five
children of Nikolay Ilich Tolstoy and Mariya Nikolayevna. After the death of his mother in 1830 and
that of his father in 1837, Tolstoy and his four siblings were raised by their relatives. He
enrolled at the University of Kazan in 1844. Although, not a bright student during his university
days, driven by an interest in literature and ethics, he read the writings of the likes of Laurence
Sterne, Charles Dickens, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In 1847, he left the university without any
degree and returned to Yasnaya Polyana. In 1851, along with his older brother Nikolay, he joined the
army and continued there till the end of the Crimean War in 1856. His experience during the war had
a deep impact in his thought, and he developed a strong distaste for war. He became a pacifist.

During the 1850s, he published the semiautobiographical trilogy of Childhood, Boyhood, and Youth. He
wrote his longest novel, war and peace, during 1865-69. One of the reasons for the novel's length is
accounted for by his critique of the prevalent approach of the historians of the day. He argued that
history is not shaped by the ideas and actions of great men like kings, generals, or intellectuals
but rather the summed total of the infinite ideas and actions of ordinary people. The wise
characters of War and Peace are not kings or generals, but a normal soldier Nikolay and an ordinary
woman Marya. Accommodating the lives of a large number of people made the novel lengthy. He wrote
his other long novel Anna Karenina from 1875-77.

Thence, he was drawn towards religion after going through a profound state of existential despair.
However, he soon became angst at the established churches and alleged them of falsifying true
Christianity. In return, he was excommunicated from the Russian Orthodox Church Synod. After
realizing what he believed to be the true message of Christ, he started popularizing his messages
through writings. This renewed realization is where his philosophy of nonresistance (nonviolent
resistance) to evil has its roots.

Besides the literary and other endeavors mentioned above, Tolstoy was involved in teaching the
children of peasants. He established no less than twenty schools in the Krapivensk region of Tula
province, with he himself teaching at the school opened at his estate at Yasnaya Polyana. Moreover,
he was involved in developing the pedagogical technique, which was accepted by many, but remains
controversial to date. He supported a democratic and humanistic education system and vehemently
questioned the existing mode of schooling. He wrote a number of books for children and the Primer
and New Primer were widely used in Russia and other parts of the world. He believed in education for
all. Tolstoy expressed his beliefs through the characters of his stories. The hero of 'A landowner's
morning,' says "To be able to influence this simple, impressionable, unspoiled class of people, to
save them from poverty, to give them some satisfaction and hand on to them the education which I, by
good fortune, enjoy, to remedy faults born of ignorance and superstition, to develop their moral
qualities and to make them love what is good - what a magnificent, what a happy future!"

Although acknowledged as he was for the literary and other deeds, many often highlighted the various
contradictions found in his writing. However, the thoughts and actions of any person have to be
judged and analyzed by considering the proper historical and social context through which they
lived. Lenin, after the death of Tolstoy in 1910, highlighted that "The contradictions in Tolstoy's
views are not the contradictions arising solely from his own mentality but are the reflections of
those most complex and contradictory conditions, social influences and historical traditions which
determined the psychology of the various classes and estates in Russian society during the reformist
but pre-revolutionary epoch."

Even though time has flown and the world has progressed to a great extent from the days of Tolstoy,
many ideas of him remain relevant. Speaking of his contribution to the development of world culture,
Lenin said that Tolstoy's heritage 'includes that which has not become a thing of the past, but
belongs to the future'. Although, the access to education has far surpassed the times of Tolstoy but
the gradual commercialization and privatization of education has necessitated the debate on quality
education for all. His opposition of capitalist exploitation and feudal land ownership, along with
the literature revolving around the common people, will continue to inspire. It will remain relevant
in the days to come.
